# Mathematics
Mathematics is a field of knowledge concerned with abstract concepts such as numbers, geometric shapes, sets, functions, and probabilities. It uses logical reasoning and proof to study and establish their properties, often expressed as theorems, formulas, and equations. Mathematics is used to model and solve problems in science, engineering, technology, economics, and everyday life.
There are many areas of mathematics, including number theory (the study of integers and their properties), algebra (the study of operations and the structures they form), geometry (the study of shapes and spaces that contain them), analysis (the quantitative study of approximation and convergence), and set theory (presently used as a foundation for all mathematics).
Mathematics involves the description and manipulation of abstract objects that are either abstractions from nature or purely abstract entities that are stipulated to have certain properties, called axioms. Mathematics uses pure reason to prove the properties of objects through proofs, which consist of a succession of applications of deductive rules to already established results. These results, called theorems, include previously proved theorems, axioms, and—in case of abstraction from nature—some basic properties that are considered true starting points of the theory under consideration.
Mathematics is essential in the natural sciences, engineering, medicine, finance, computer science, and the social sciences. Although mathematics is widely used to model empirical phenomena, its results are established by deductive proof rather than by experiment. The relationship between mathematical truth, logic, and reality is  a subject of philosophical debate. Some areas of mathematics, such as game theory, are developed in close correlation with their applications and are often grouped under applied mathematics. Other areas are developed independently from any application but often find practical applications later.
Mathematical written records first appeared in Ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia, but the concept of proof and its associated mathematical rigor began in Ancient Greek mathematics, exemplified in Euclid's Elements. Mathematics was primarily divided into geometry and arithmetic until the 16th and 17th centuries, when algebra and infinitesimal calculus evolved into new fields. Since then, the interaction between mathematical innovations and scientific discoveries has led to a correlated increase in the development of both. At the end of the 19th century, the foundational crisis of mathematics led to the systematic use of the axiomatic method, which heralded a dramatic increase in the number of mathematical areas and their fields of application. The contemporary Mathematics Subject Classification lists more than sixty first-level areas of mathematics.


Areas of mathematics

Before the Renaissance, mathematics was divided into two main areas: arithmetic, regarding the study and manipulation of numbers, and geometry, regarding the study of shapes. Some types of pseudoscience, such as numerology and astrology, were not then clearly distinguished from mathematics.
Beginning with the Renaissance, two more areas became predominant. New mathematical notation led to modern algebra which, roughly speaking, begins with the study and manipulation of algebraic expressions. Calculus, consisting of the two subfields differential calculus and integral calculus, originated with geometry but evolved into the study of continuous functions, which model the typically nonlinear relationships between varying quantities, as represented by variables. This division into four main areas—arithmetic, geometry, algebra, and calculus—endured until the end of the 19th century. Other areas that were previously studied by mathematicians, such as celestial mechanics and solid mechanics, are now considered as belonging to physics. The subject of combinatorics has been studied for much of recorded history, yet did not become a separate branch of mathematics until the 17th century.
At the end of the 19th century, the foundational crisis in mathematics and the systematic use of the axiomatic method led to an explosion of new areas of mathematics. The 2020 Mathematics Subject Classification contains no less than sixty-three first-level areas. Some of these areas correspond to the older division, as is true regarding number theory (the modern name for higher arithmetic) and geometry. Several other first-level areas have "geometry" in their names or are otherwise commonly considered part of geometry. Algebra and calculus do not appear as first-level areas but are split into several first-level areas. Other first-level areas emerged during the 20th century or had not previously been considered as mathematics, such as mathematical logic and foundations.


Number theory

Number theory evolved from the manipulation of numbers, that is, natural numbers 
  
    
      
        (
        
          N
        
        )
        ,
      
    
    {\displaystyle (\mathbb {N} ),}
  
 and later expanded to integers 
  
    
      
        (
        
          Z
        
        )
      
    
    {\displaystyle (\mathbb {Z} )}
  
 and rational numbers 
  
    
      
        (
        
          Q
        
        )
        .
      
    
    {\displaystyle (\mathbb {Q} ).}
  
 Number theory was once called arithmetic, but nowadays this term is mostly used for numerical calculations. The study of numbers arguably dates back to ancient Babylon and probably China, but developed into a distinct discipline in Ancient Greece. Two prominent early number theorists were Euclid and Diophantus of Alexandria. The modern study of number theory in its abstract form is largely attributed to Pierre de Fermat and Leonhard Euler. The field came to full fruition with the contributions of Adrien-Marie Legendre and Carl Friedrich Gauss.
Many easily stated number problems have solutions that require sophisticated methods, oft
